Our idea is to develop a program to give out warnings and formulate strategies based on response given on the preceding warning for any kind of natural disaster. The current system of alerting uses three signs based on colors; yellow alert means low risk, orange alert means moderate risk and is an indication to prepare for action and red alert is means high risk and calls for immediate action. As per the latest regulations, the PMO/Cabinet Secretariat will have to be informed every three hours of the developing situation of any disaster characterized as ‘red’ and every 12 hours in case the disaster is ‘orange’. 
The experiences of natural calamities in our country shows that even with several warnings and improved alert systems, we stand at a position where warnings are ignored and therefore we are put into situation where we are underprepared to face the disaster. The duration between the release of warning and the day on which the disaster actually strikes is extremely crucial. We seek out to work during this period and improve the preparations and hence help mitigate a large portion of loss.
Our program aims to (1) predict and ‘estimate’ the number of people and the value of property going to be affected due to the forecasted disaster and attach this data along with the forecast warnings to the disaster management bodies and other concerned authorities. Next step is to (2) record ‘response’ by the disaster management authorities against every such alert issued by the forecasting bodies and our program. This response will be an estimate of the available resources and management that can meet the demands of safeguarding entire or a part of the endangered population and property as estimated by our program. Next step will be (3) analyzing these responses to formulate the upcoming warning and strategies and calculate the amount of resources required to aid the leftover part of endangered area. The process continues till resources and strategies of aiding all the vulnerable population/property has been arranged or the disaster actually strikes.  This way, when the disaster actually strikes, we will have a more precise idea of how much population/property has already been rescued and how much still need rescuing and aid. This will help to carry out better rescue operations.
Taking a specific case of dams, many floods occur due to poor management and untimely opening of dam gates despite prior warnings and alerts. The program, upon being installed in the systems of dams’ management will ensure proper operations of dam gates and proper follow through of warnings and alerts done by the forecasting department. Releasing the water at the right time and preparing for the coming monsoons can help prevent lots of floods that happen all over the country. Good calculations of the volume of water a dam can hold, amount of rainfall expected, rate of volume flow of water from dam gets combined with the warning-response program can help even prevent potential floods many times.
